# OCR of scan2_page1_20250822.jpg

Cy Scripps

Scripps Clinic
Department of Orthopedics

Pre-Surgical MRSA/MSSA Screening

What is MRSA?

MRSA stands for Methicillin Resistant Stap
bacterium that has developed a resistance
other commonly used antibiotics. MSSA is anot
developed this-resistance.

h Aureus. MRSA is a variety of the staphylococcus
to Methicillin, a synthetic form of penicillin, and to
her variety of staphylococcus that has not yet

Why do we screen for MRSA and MSSA?

Both MRSA and MSSA bacteria are commonly found on our skin, in our nostrils and
throughout the environment, along with many other germ varieties. Even though these germs
are in contact with us, they do not often cause an actual infection. But if you have a hospital
stay and have a surgical incision, the risk of any germ causing an infection increases. To
reduce this risk as much as possible, we ask all scheduled surgical patients to bathe with an
antibacterial soap prior to their hospital admission. Using this antibacterial soap will help
eliminate staph germs from your skin. As an extra precaution, we also screen pre-surgical
patients by performing a simple nasal swab/Q-tip. In those patients who screen positive for
MRSA or MSSA in the nostrils, we prescribe an ointment to help eliminate these germs. You
will be informed 2 to 3 days after a swab is taken if you need to use the ointment. If you are
not contacted, you can assume your swab did not show MRSA or MSSA.

For more information regarding community acquired MRSA, please visit
https://|www.cde.gov/mrsa/

if your nasal swab shows positive for MRSA or MSSA:

Your surgeon’s nurse will call ina prescription for Mupirocin 2% ointment. For 5 days prior to
your surgery, apply a small quantity to a cotton swab/Q-tip and apply inside your nostril as far
back as you can tolerate. Repeat in the other nostril. Do this twice daily, morning and evening,
and the morning of your surgery before leaving home. Even if you do not start this procedure a
full 5 days before your surgery, using it just a few days will be beneficial.

if your nasal swab reveals MRSA, after surgery you will be assigned a private room with
“contact precautions”. This means that anyone having direct contact with you, including
visitors, will need to wear disposable gloves and gown which are found in every room. Hand
washing is also required upon leaving your room. Visitors may sit in your room without gloves
and gown if they do not have contact with you. Visiting children should be monitored closely
and not allowed contact with the patient.

V1 06.2022

